---
layout: category-post
title:  "Milestone 1"
date:   2018-09-11 13:02:31 -0400
categories: milestones
---
LDP-M1: Project Selection
NYU Educational Communication and Technology DMDL/G4L Thesis

Write-up
My write-up answers following questions:  
not there yet
kinda, but needs work
  strong
For whom would this LDP be designed and for what purpose? (What is the driving question, problem, issue, or need I am addressing?)



Why is something like this important for my target group? For others?  (How do I know this to be true-- convince us by backing up your claims using credible sources)



What are the outcomes I care about, or the impact I hope this project will have? (if applicable, this could be stated in terms of acquired knowledge, skills or changes in behaviors and attitudes)



What are some insights I already have about this problem or my learners that might guide my solution ideas?  



(optional) What are some initial project ideas? (stay light and tentatives; these ideas may change later and you don’t want feedback to focus only on your solutions right now)



How/why might my project be different/unique or better in some way than solutions that are already out there? (what are those other solutions, if known at this point)





Other considerations:
I have considered following:
No idea
   Not sure
  Yes!
This project is feasible for me.. (what skills and knowledge do you already have and what you will need to acquire?... if your solution ideas are tentative, this may be hard to know at this stage. That’s ok)



I have or can gain access to my target users/ participants/ subject matter experts/ other collaborators (for input, feedback, user testing, etc)



This project will involve at least a few things I can build on (a deep interest, experience, subject matter expertise, technical skills, use of a certain design process)



I have jotted down and gotten some feedback on any questions or concerns I have about this project.




Comments




Early thoughts and plans
Sustainability and conservation has always been a topic close to my heart. I have practiced pro-environmental behaviour in some form and habit for many years, sometimes with support from my family and friends and sometimes without. But this behaviour has mostly stemmed from a personal endeavour because I have always felt a certain empathy towards nature and wildlife through personal experiences, and not because I was introduced to the any related topics in school or in any form of formal or informal education. When I was in school, which was almost 2 decades back, environmental education was mostly non-existent. I do not have any recollection of being taught about our environment and how it fits into our lives (or more like how we fit into the environment around us).

Now, I believe most schools in India have a subject called Environmental Studies or EVS aimed at primary-to-middle-school students. The subject aims to make students more aware about themselves, their family and society and its culture, as well as the animals and plants and the natural world around them. I am not well aware of the curriculum for environmental education followed in the schools in the US. However, I know that environmental education has been part of the main school curriculum for a few decades now. New York City also has environmentally focussed high schools as well as educational organisations that have developed nature-focussed pedagogies for use by teachers in various schools. There are many informal learning programs and organisations in both India and the US that create and run some innovative environmental education programs. There are even many undergraduate and masters programs in environmental studies and conservation. Environmental awareness and education can find roots in the US as early as the 1970’s (confirm and cite). (Find for India).

If there are so many opportunities and avenues for students to learn about being environmentally conscious, why are we not seeing any results in the form of more sustainable regulations and laws from the government and improved practices from industries that are less harmful to nature and its wildlife? Why are we still grappling with many basic issues regarding climate change and global warming across the world. And in some instances, why are we moving backwards when it’s necessary to look in the other direction and move forward. Why are there still so many climate change naysayers and why more sustainable innovations have not become mainstream choices for the masses. Why is the opportunity to live a  sustainable lifestyle available to only the richer sections of our society, because of the high costs involved.

Our education system, including the way our schools have been built, curriculums have been designed, and learning has been imparted, was to prepare generations of people to feed into the Industrialization Era (cite), and it is quite clear that this system has been extremely successful and impressive. But this format does not seem to be working anymore.

For my thesis project, I will be working on a scholarly paper through which I aim to understand the scope and impact of environmental education in primary, middle and high schools in India and the US, and find answers to the question: Why are we not producing more environmentally-conscious citizens?

I will be focussing on the following points:
Landscape audit of environmental curriculum across three grades – 4, 8, and 12.
Landscape audit of informal education aimed at students from the above mentioned grades.
Comparison between evs curriculum in the two countries – India and the US
Comparison of env laws and efforts between the two countries – India and the US
Literature review on impact/assessment of environmental curriculum
Review theories and literature that discuss education as tool for behaviour change and conceptual change

Hopefully, my work on this scholarly inquiry paper would go on to benefit both educators and learners. Specifically, I hope that this inquiry paper would help to create a dialogue among educators and educational reformers regarding the impact of environmental and sustainable education as it is currently available, and make a strong case for incorporating EE more rigorously  in school curriculums, through solutions and examples. Create Ecopedagogy, improve/create ecoliteracy, make the next generation more ecoliterate than ever before.

Consideration 2 – https://en.unesco.org/gap?language=en

https://www.plt.org/about-us/why-environmental-education-is-important/

https://www.fastcompany.com/40408119/could-universal-environmental-education-spur-a-green-revolution

https://globaldigitalcitizen.org/how-outdoor-education-can-prepare-students-for-the-future

https://people.stanford.edu/nmardoin/sites/default/files/documents/EE_Strategy_for_the_Future.pdf

Add Hungerford

EnvEd_Importance
