---
layout: category-post
title:  "Milestone 3"
date:   2018-10-01 14:53:31 -0400
categories: milestones
---

Milestone 3: Background  

In this scholarly inquiry paper, I aim to discover, understand, and share the scope and effectiveness of Environmental Education as a subject of inquiry in New York City public schools. I review existing literature on the history, theoretical concepts, pedagogical practices and curriculums, and role of technology that is currently in use in Environmental Education (EE). I will also collect data through interviews with key experts in the field and through case studies of classroom practices and interactions between students and teachers while studying an EE related topic.


**Motivation for inquiry**
In this section, I provide the motivation for and structure of my scholarly inquiry paper. Environmental Education (EE) was implemented and introduced in schools all over the US  several decades ago. However, it appears that the impact of EE in student development and consequently in producing environmentally responsible citizens has been minimal or negligible even till now in 2018. Understanding the relation between environmental education and behaviour modification is outside the scope of this paper. However, I will attempt to understand and analyse the breadth and depth of EE as it is practiced in New York City public schools in order to present a tiny slice of the overall EE movement in the US.


Environmental Education in the US began to find its root in the US around the 1970s, soon after environmentalism as a social movement began to gain public prominence. In the 1960–70s, a general protest culture developed, where the public became aware of the environmental degradation taking place due to human activities and demanded the government to take corrective measures. The result of this mass public awareness was the declaration of monumental federal environmental acts such as the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act. The National Environment Protection Act (NEPA) followed soon and was passed in 1970. At the same time, a study conducted by the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) painted the picture of an educational landscape in desperate need of program and curriculum development with a bigger emphasis on learning about and protecting the environment. Among the schools and districts of the 50 US states, there existed only 54 programs with any EE element (National Science Teachers Association, 1970). As a result, the National American Association for Environmental Education (NAAEE) was formed in 1971, and soon many curricula for environmental education were developed.


It has been almost 50 years since environmental education appeared in school curricula. When was EE introduced in public schools in NYC first? However, EE does not have the kind of reach, development, and integration in curriculum that other subject areas such as science, reading, mathematics etc have. (Need to cite).  Moreover, if we are to put our belief in the education system as it has existed over the last few centuries, the purpose of education is the acquisition of knowledge that allows individuals to make informed decisions. If this is considered while talking about EE, one would expect that students after having learnt about environmental concepts and related topics would make choices that are good for the environment and overall reduce the effects of global warming and natural degradation that the world is currently facing. But, that has not been the case. Half a decade late, it is still first necessary to prove that climate change is real, and make appeals about a need to switch from fossil fuels to renewable energy, and impress upon the benefits of reducing waste and recycling materials and accessing local goods. What appears to be lacking in the practices and purposes of environmentally focussed  education that is failing to meet its most essential requirement?  Discuss about oil companies, big brands, and activism based on knowledge and awareness here. For companies to make big changes, there first needs to be a demand.


*Current state of affairs:*
Despite its apparent importance, environmental education is still not an integral component of school curricula in many schools across the US (need to cite). Even though there is a national environmental policy exists (National Environmental Education Act 1990), there is very little push for its  effective and continued implementation.
As a society, we are still struggling to prevent global warming and reduce the damaging effects of climate change despite knowing well its causes and methods to fight it. Lack of empathy by the governments driven in large parts by the self-centered motivations of the oil and petrol  industry as well as lack of awareness among the public are some of the reasons for the inaction.


*The vision:*
In an ideal scenario, environmental education would form the backbone of all subjects and topics taught at all grade levels. Students would regularly engage with their local environment, work on projects related to issues in their community and physical space, and engage in lessons that promote systems thinking and crosscutting of educational concepts.
The world in 21st century is successfully working towards reducing carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere – the industry, industry, and society are working together to innovate, expand, and use technology and products that do not have harmful effects on the environment. Citizens are aware of the effects their actions can have on the natural world, and live sustainably. The government and industry have moved away from a profit-based economy toward a more circular-based economy that looks at the holistic gain for all members of the society and the environment.


*Identifying the gap:*
In an effort to identify the gap between the current and the proposed vision, it seems necessary to review the scope and effectiveness of environmental education as it exists currently. I begin to do this by first, only looking at the current status of EE in NYC public schools – how do different standards and curricula adopted by schools incorporate EE, how do school teachers and administration support learning of EE, methods of teaching, and review of existing literature on the same topic.


The result of this exercise will be an analysis, synthesis, and review of literature, as well as a commentary on the currently adopted learning standards and the different types of pedagogical practice and tools (curricula and projects) used in NYC public schools.


**Audience**
The critical review and recommendations made in this paper might prove to be useful for educators and educational reformists in the government, along with non-profit and private educational institutions. This group is most actively involved with and have the power to affect the way students’ learn. I imagine teachers and reformists are curious to know about the current status of educational programs and make decisions that can lead to useful and substantial changes in the school system, and this paper hopes to provide them with some useful answers.


**Proposed structure of paper**
My research methods will include secondary research to collect literature on environmental education, as well as interviews with key experts and players in the field, as well as case studies in which I will be looking at how a topic with EE is taught across different grades. This will be followed by an analysis and critique stage, where I will be developing criterias to analyse the data collected. Finally, I will include recommendations based on the analysis and other evidence gathered.


The scholarly inquiry paper will follow the following structure:

– Literature review

    - History

    – Theories

    – Goals and standards – learning outcomes

    – Impact

– Landscape audit of EE curricula

– Description of EE infrastructure - structure in schools (interviews with DOE) and costs involved.

– Using technology to leverage better learning outcomes in EE

– Interviews

– Case study

    – Review of single environmental topic taught across different grades

    – Ethnographic observations

– Analysis of review and case studies

– Critique

– Recommendations

**Research questions**
The main purpose of this scholarly inquiry is to gaps that exist currently in EE in NYC public schools, while at the same time recognize the successes in this field in an effort to become a useful resource for policymakers, educational reformists, and educators to improve the field of EE.

Based on this, my research questions are currently quite broad and may appear difficult to assess. However, they act as a guiding light for the direction my work needs to take, and as I gather more insights, the questions will become more specific and narrow.

Q1. What is the current status and scope of environmental education in New York City’s public schools?

Q2. What is the range and type of pedagogical practices (teaching and content) in environmental education from K to 12 that teachers use?

Q3. What approach/theory/practice might be most effective in achieving the goals of EE?

Q4. How can EE curriculums and programs in schools be made more robust to ensure a more active, widespread, and effective citizen participation in policy making and industry affairs concerning climate change and sustainability?


**Theories**
While reviewing literature, I will be using the following learning theories as a basis of understanding:
Constructivism – collectively designing a world through experiences and engaging with objects in one’s surrounding. Knowledge is constructed and interpreted through action (Ackerman 2004 Constructing Knowledge).  
Place-based learning – Becoming more conscious of places in order to  extend our notions of pedagogy and accountability towards places (Gruenewald).
Principles associated with liberal education.
